(181v) An Account of the Bravery of Devgenij: How Filipap and the Maiden Maksimijana Sent a Missive

1. When Filipap and the maiden Maksimijana heard about the bravery and about the strength of Devgenij, they began to think how they might catch him 

2. like a hare in a net. 

3. Filipap is brave and very strong and has great force; 

4. the maiden Maksimijana too has manly bravery, her army also.

5. And they advanced on glorious Devgenij and came and halted, before they reached the Greek city, on the river Euphrates. 

6. And Maksimijana sent a guileful missive to glorious Devgenij: 

7. "O light, brilliant sun, glorious Devgenij, you rule among all of us, the brave and the strong," 

8. "like the month of May among all the months. In the month of May all heavenly and earthly (beauty) flowers; the trees put forth leaves and all heavenly beauty is created;" 

9. "even so (182) are you among us, glorious Devgenij." 

10. "And we, glorious Devgenij, entreat you: play not the sluggard, bestir yourself;" 

11. "come to us with no large force to the river Euphrates," 

12. "that we may see your youthfulness and bravery; there is no plot against you at all."

13. And glorious Devgenij read the missive 

14. and laughed 

15. and said to his father: "Father, I wish to go and see glorious and brave Filipap (and) the maiden Maksimijana," 

16. But his father said: "My dear child, glorious Devgenij, it is too early for you to think of battle;" 

17. "you have not been in victorious battles, whereas Filipap in battles is strong and brave and the maiden Maksimijana is also, and he has a great force."

18. But Devgenij replied to the missive; he sent his favorite to them and said: 

19. "It is a great shame for me to go to fight against a woman," 

20. "but you, Filipap, old uncle, why have you come in great strength and led a host of innocent (people) against me?"

21. The maiden Maksimijana said: "Do not, brilliant sun, glorious Devgenij, have any such thought in your mind at all, since we have come see your youthfulness." 

22. Day after day Devgenij was thinking how he might see the bravery (182v) of Filipap. 

23. (And) he took a few of his favorites with him and asked a prayer from his father and from his mother: "Quickly bless me, father and mother mine." 

24. "Have no concern at all over this; no wounds will be on my body from the hand of man," 

25. "since I put my trust in the strength of God and in your fatherly grace and that of my mother."

26. And mounting his horse he went on his way. 

27. He reached the river Euphrates and stood on the bank 

28. and sent his favorites to Filipap and the maiden Maksimijana. 

29. When Filipap saw that Devgenij had few soldiers, 

30. he began to chase them with his whole army.

31. When Devgenij saw his followers pursued, 

32. grasping his lance he planted his lance in the river and vaulted over on foot like a fierce falcon from a hunter's hand; 

33. he cried in a loud voice: "Give me my horse called Far'!" 

34. And mounting his horse he began to chase them as a good mower to mow grass: in the first mowing a thousand, in the second another thousand he conquered; 

35. in the third mowing he overtook Filipap and smote him between the shoulders with his mace and knock him off his horse. 

36. (When the maiden Maksimijana saw that Devgenij) was binding Filipap, 

37. she aimed her lance, wishing to run glorious Devgenij through (183) from behind.

38. Seeing this, Devgenij grasped her lance and smote her with his lance and knocked her off her horse. 

39. And having taken Filipap and the maiden Maksimijana, 

40. some he killed, while some he bound, and he drove them before him as a good shepherd drove sheep through a river.

41. At that time old uncle Filipap turned to Devgenij and said: 

42. "Gold-winged hawk, glorious Devgenij, you are glorious among us all, the strong and the brave. But there is yet a braver and a stronger than you in the world," 

43. "glorious Stratig, who has four sons; the rest of his army the earth cannot contain. And (he has) a daughter, the very glorious and beautiful Stratigovna; she has manly boldness and bravery, while there is nothing fairer on earth than her fairness." 

44. "Many tsars and kings, brave and strong, have come, but no one can take her, and to no one is she like in beauty and strength." 

45. "But now spare my years; after a little let me go." Glorious Devgenij said: "I wish to learn whether you are speaking the truth; then I shall let you go; I shall put my mark on your face for all time." 

46. The maiden Maksimijana also began to entreat him: "O light, brilliant sun, glorious Devgenij (183v), to me have come many tsars and kings, brave and strong in much strength, but no one has dishonored me with a single word;" 

47. "all have been conquered by my hands." 

48. "But now God has submitted me to you." 

49. "If you join with me, there will be nothing stronger than we and no one can stand (against us)."

50. Glorious Devgenij said: "Brother, Maksimijana, I have no man's help save the grace of God and my mother's prayer: that will help me."

51. For Devgenij it is written: "If you join with Maksimijana, his life is sixteen years; if he joins with Stratigovna, his life is thirty-six years."

52. (Devgenij) called loudly for his favorite and said: "Go to my father and my mother and say to them thus:" 

53. "Rejoice, father and mother mine, that I have defeated Filipap." 

54. "And take (him) to my father and Maksimijana here to my mother. If you offend her with even a single word, this day you cease to live." 

55. The favorite came to his (Devgenij's) father's and mother's house and brought them Filipap and the maiden Maksimijana and told them all in order. 

56. His father and mother were ever very joyful about him.

