(16) The Tale of How Devgenij Defeated Tsar Vasilij 

1. There was a certain tsar named Vasilij. And he became extremely angry, hearing of the daring and bravery of Devgenij, and he burned with the desire to capture him [970-978]

2. for tsar Vasilij controlled all the land of Cappadocia.

3. And so he equipped his envoys and sent off an epistle to Devgenij and with feigned cordiality (16v) he wrote thus: [979]

4. "Famed Devgenij! I very much want to see you. Do not hesitate now to visit my tsardom; your daring and courage have resounded over all the earth." [980-982]

5. "And I have come to love you with all my soul, and I wish to gaze upon your youth." [983-984]

6. They delivered the royal epistle to Devgenij, and Devgenij read it and understood that the epistle to him was false.

7. And Devgenij answered the tsar: "I am a simple man. Your royal highness has no need of anything from me," [987-991]

8. "but if you wish to see me, then take a small number of warriors with you and come to the River Euphrates." [993-994]

9. And then he ordered the envoys to say to their tsar: "If you wish to see me, an unworthy one, then take a few warriors with you, so as not to anger me, for youth brings many irrational acts with it." [995-1000]

10. "And if I should become angry and destroy your army, then you will not return alive!"

11. So they rode back and the envoy transmitted all that Devgenij had said. When he heard this, the tsar became extremely angry and sent the envoy back to Devgenij with the words: 

12. "My child! I do not wish to bring many warriors with me but only to admire your youth. I have nothing else in my heart." [983-984]

13. The royal envoy came to Devgenij and related all that had been said by the tsar and Devgenij answered him: "Tell your tsar this:" 

14. "I do not fear (17) you, tsar, nor your innumerable army, for I place my hopes on God." [992]

15. "I do not fear your evil plot but I say to you:" 

16. "Come to the River Euphrates and you and I shall see each other." [993-994]

17. "If you come with a large force, then you will not rejoice in the fact that you rule, and your entire force will be destroyed." 

18. And the envoy came to tsar Vasilij and related the words of Devgenij to him.

19. When he had heard this, the tsar immediately ordered his warriors summoned and having gathered them together, he moved off with that force to the place indicated by Devgenij. And having come to the River Euphrates, he set up his tents at some distance from the river. [1004-1006]

20. And the royal pavilion was enormous, bright red in color, and the top of it was sewn in pure gold; and inside the tent were quartered several thousand warriors. And the entire force of the tsar was covered: some in tents and other in sheltered places. 

21. And the tsar stayed for six days on the river and he said to his voevodas: "Devgenij has found out something and contrived something against us for he himself intends to come with a large force." 

22. And having said this, tsar Vasilij shook from fear.

23. And Devgenij sent a servant to the tsar with these words: 

24. "I am amazed that you have put forth so much labor (17v) on my account as I am nothing." [1016-1017]

25. "But I already told you of my custom: if you wish to meet me, then come with a small detachment."

26. "But you have gathered an enormous army thinking to defeat me, and that is disgraceful," 

27. "for my fame has gone throughout all the earth and to all lands. And so now do as you have intended to do."

28. Tsar Vasilij answered: "How dare you that you do not wish to submit to me, a tsar!" And fitting out his envoy, he sent him across the river and received Devgenij's envoy. 

29. And the royal envoy came to transmit the royal words to Devgenij. 

30. And Devgenij replied; "Tell your tsar: if he is relying on his great force, then I hope on God the Creator. And your force cannot compare with the might of God." [1040-1041]

31. "This day is nearly over but prepare for battle as of tomorrow morning, and come forth with your innumerable force and you will see the courage of an insignificant man who will appear before you; otherwise, I will be shamed for that which is not undertaken." 

32. And the envoy of tsar Vasilij came back from Devgenij and told his words (18) to the tsar.

33. The tsar quickly called his boyars and began taking counsel with them, and the magnates said to him: "What is your rule worth, tsar, if you are afraid of a single warrior – no forces are seen with him." 

34. And Devgenij's envoy hurried across the river and told Devgenij all that had occurred with the tsar.

35. The next day at daybreak tsar Vasilij placed his forces and got ready to cross over the river 

36. to catch Devgenij like a hare in a trap. 

37. Devgenij saw that tsar Vasilij had prepared an innumerable force, and he guessed that when he had crossed the river, he would surround him. 

38. Furious, Devgenij said to his servants: "Join me in a little while, first I shall myself undertake some little labor and serve that tsar."

39. And having said these words, he propped himself up with his lance and leapt across the river like a strong falcon, 

40. and he shouted at the top of his lungs: "Where is this tsar Vasilij who wanted to see something of me?" 

41. He shouted and immediately the warriors rushed at him, and he stuck his lance in the ground and rushed at the warriors with his bare sword. 

42. And he galloped up and like a good mower cutting grass, the first time he galloped through, he defeated a thousand, then he came back and galloped through them again, and another (18v) thousand he defeated.

43. Tsar Vasilij saw the courage of Devgenij and with but a handful of his men fled. 

44. Devgenij killed the remaining warriors and then bound up the remainder 

45. and shouted to his servants across the river: "Bring that swift horse of mine, the one called Wind." 

46. They drove the horse over to him, he leapt onto it 

47. and Devgenij tore off and soon caught up to tsar Vasilij at the walls of his city, 

48. and he killed all the warriors who were with him, and took the tsar and three of his companions captive.

49. And he sent one of them into the city with the news. And he said to the citizens: 

50. "Come out to meet Devgenij; from this day on God has granted it that he will rule in your country." 

51. When the heard this, they gathered together and came out to fight with him before the city, thinking that they would be fighting with an ordinary man. 

52. And he sent a message to them, saying: "Put down your weapons and do not anger me." 

53. They replied: "A single man cannot stand against our entire city." 

54. When he heard their reply, Devgenij grew angry and rushed at them: 

55. some he killed, others he bound and handed over to his servants, and then he entered the city and began ruling there. 

56. (19) And he soon freed the captives, as it says in scripture: "The servant cannot be greater than his master, nor the son greater than his father."

57. "But I still have twelve years to live and now I wish to rest, I have seen many wars and victories in my youth," 

58. so spoke Devgenij to his father and he sat him on the royal throne and he summoned all his captives and gave them their freedom. 

59. And he placed brands on the faces of Kanam and Ioakim and sent them to their native country. 

60. And he summoned all his relatives and shared in their great joy, and thus it continued for many days.

ω. Glory to our God now and forever and to the ages of ages! Amen.

